And Mr. Conway, Chief Economist, we note and we welcome that this is your first
monetary policy appearance. We look forward to some introductory comments, and
then we've got a number of people signalled who'd like some interaction. So
welcome Governor, and we look forward to
it.
Thank you. So Good morning, Chair, good morning to me. Committee. It's good to
be with you here today to talk about our monetary policy statement that we
released yesterday. As you've already heard, I have assistant Governor Karen
silk and Chief Economist Paul Conway with me, but we also have MP see members,
Karl Hansen and Prasanna gay here in the room with us, as we announced
yesterday, the MP see reached consensus to hold the OCR at two point 25% the
slightly higher forward OCR pass reflects our somewhat stronger confidence in
The economic recovery and balanced risk to inflation. We know that many New
Zealanders are feeling stretched right now with costs for some essential items
like food and electricity much higher than they were a year ago. While some
parts of the country have benefited from high export prices, new job
opportunities remain relatively scarce, especially in the bigger cities. The
recovery is still at an early stage, but it is broadening across the economy.
The labour market is stabilising, but unemployment remains high, and that means
that there's still spare capacity on the economy. So the economic fundamentals
are consistent with inflation falling to the target midpoint over the next 12
months. If the economy evolves as expected, monetary policy is likely to remain
accommodative for some time. As the recovery strengthen and inflation falls
sustainably to the target midpoint, monetary policy settings will gradually
normalise. We will continue to assess incoming data carefully, and of course, if
the outlook for inflation changes, the Monetary Policy Committee will adjust our
monetary policy stance to ensure that inflation returns sustainably to the 2%
target midpoint. So we look forward to your questions. Okay,
thank you. Dr Brown, I'm going to go to the Honourable barbads First
Tina katakato, and I also note some of your monetary policy committee members
are here just we've got a couple of branches of questions. The first one is
around forecasting confidence. So the MP s in November last year forecast
inflation to be at 2.7% we have come now to the December obviously, those
figures at 3.1% what lessons have you learned from that, given that that was a
that was a miss, and obviously, is forecasting and what So, what have you
learned from it? And what confidence? And what confidence do you have that
inflation is going to track back down to that
2%
it's a very good question, and it's true that inflation was at 3.1% it's outside
of our target band, and it's high, and we're not at all comfortable with having
inflation at that level. We have looked very carefully into the data, and we can
see the things that were higher than expected. In the December quarter. It was
mainly tradables, things like airfares and foreign accommodation and also fuel
prices, and they tend to be very volatile. And then it was a little bit higher
administered prices as well that affected non tradables. It is important, and we
have discussed this at length, to the extent that they might be more persistent
going forward. So when we look at these kind of data, we know, and we can see
already from some January data that we got earlier that week, that some of that
is falling back, like I know, that foreign accommodation fell by almost 15% in
the in the January numbers. So that gives us confidence that some of that will
fall out of the statistics. But then we always look to economic fundamentals,
and when the economic fundamentals, they're very clearly in favour of inflation
falling going forward, wage growth is modest. We do have spare capacity, so
that's why we see this. But we are highly vigilant, and we know that there could
be new shocks.
So you mentioned administered costs, and one of the things that wasn't quite
clear in the MP is, how does the Reserve Bank, what's the methodology you use to
forecast administered costs. And I'm very sensitive to that, because that is one
you can you know interest rates, building materials, etc, are sensitive to
changes in interest rates, but costs generally a reflection of fiscal policy or
local authority, like rates, for example. So.
Now what's the methodology used there? Yeah. So first of all, we do have some
information on administrative costs like university fees and vehicle licencing.
We know that they won't be as high this year as last year. But then we have to
make some assumptions. I'm going to hand over to Paul if you want to comment
some more on the details.
Thank you, Kevin, so for and you're right on it. Evans, like it was a
significant miss the inflation number. I think we were on 2.7 and it came in at
3.1 and as the governor said, some of that was in the tradables side of the CPI
basket. And essentially, because of volatility, there's some prices in there
that bounce around by extreme amounts that's very difficult to predict on a
quarter by quarter basis, and also non tradables, inflation didn't fall by as
much as we thought it would, essentially because of these administered prices.
So our forecasting of administered prices, it's very because they don't sort of
move in the same way as prices in the private sector of the economy. They're not
sensitive to monetary policy. We essentially take a sort of bottom up view. We
try to get across what are the plans of all the councils across New Zealand in
terms of rates, for example, what are policy settings with respect to university
fees or vehicle licencing doing? We try to sort of get across as much of that as
we can. And you know, we're confident that we for at least some of those
components of administered prices, as again, as the governor said, that we won't
be seeing as much inflation in 2026 as we did in 2025
sorry, the
second, the second sort of branch of questioning. Thank you. Dr kumui is around
transparency, Governor, that was one of the things that you when you first came
in, that you
said, looking at how
you can make more transparent. It's quite through the monetary policy statement.
I did note there was a little bit more commentary on some of the debate within
the Monetary Policy Committee. And it seems to appear that there were there was
a decision by consensus, as opposed to a unanimous decision, to hold the OCR,
one of the comments that a member says supporting maintaining the OCR at current
levels for now, but noted that if economic activity recovers as expected,
monetary stimulus could begin to be withdrawn somewhat earlier than without
compromising economic Recovery. Can you can? Can you just give us a bit more
context as to why those comments are made, and a bit more as to the debate and
response in relation to that?
Yes, thank you. And I think for us, it's really important to show the discussion
that we have throughout the process, because, as you said before, there is
always risks to the inflation outlook, and there's always uncertainties, and
there's also uncertainties around exactly what monetary stance is appropriate.
So one member did discuss the fact that even if the economy evolves as we
expect, maybe we could withdraw stimulus a little bit earlier, and some another
member made an argument why we might want to keep policy accommodative even for
a little bit longer with the same forecast. And that is because it's a little
bit hard to assess exactly how firms pricing behaviour will look going forward.
Some people think that if we are too confident that we'll see a strong economic
recovery, firms might all coordinate and start hiking prices sooner. Other
people think that other forces will push it back, and these kind of things we're
constantly following and trying to judge where we are in the cycle, and it is
uncertain. And we have to be humble in saying that, you know, we can't know with
100% certainty exactly how firms will behave in this cycle.
So
that is kind of the foundation for the discussion.
And have you given any more of like, how is your significant development in
relation to that transparency side? So quite clear. A little bit. There is a bit
more in here that we can sort of point to and ask questions on. But have you
developed your thinking more particularly around what we see overseas with
actually Monetary Policy Committee members actually being quite clear where they
voted, or whether, if, even if you didn't vote, you know what their comments
were, and a summary of the why they decided to keep things at the way they are
or not?
Yeah. So we started those discussions, and that is part of the charter, and the
charter is an agreement between the Monetary Policy Committee and the finance
minister. So after this monetary policy round, we will have another meeting to
further discuss those things. But the discussions so far have been very
constructive. So we are. We are moving in that direction. I don't know if Paul
or Karen might want to comment as well, like
as the Governor announced yesterday, we are going to move to eight meetings a
year. Is because we're going to get monthly CPI data, which is very welcome.
Develop. Commitment and yeah, so that's kind of the first tranche of the of that
piece of work. And there will be, we are kicking it around as the committee in a
very constructive way, and there'll be more to come in that vein.
So so just to clarify, so is it your belief that, because of the charter, you
need to get either approval from the Minister of Finance to be able to change
some of or to open up a bit more of the decision making process to report on it.
You can't just do that off your own legislative powers
that formally it's an agreement. So we have so we need a discussion, which is
completely normal, but what we're doing is that we wanted to have this for this
was my first monetary policy round, yeah, so we did really want to have it, look
at the process, see how are we doing this? And then we have meetings to evaluate
what kind of things do we want to change going forward. And those discussions
have been very constructive. So it's just not stressing something. So we do what
is appropriate for for the New Zealand economy and our setting here in New
Zealand.
Yep, totally acknowledge that it's more just legally you are independent and you
don't necessarily my understanding of how you read the Reserve Bank Act is that
you don't need to get approval from the Minister of Finance to make the
decisions around this, or is it, or have you received other advice?
No, so, so the only thing is that the there are, there's the act, and then there
is the Monetary Policy Committee Charter, and that charter is formally an
agreement, so it's just that it
will be always trump.
Yeah,
the charter, thank you
very good. I'm gonna go to Dr Deborah
Russell, thank you. Fascinating reading, as always, look. I want to dig a little
bit into what's going on with households, because there were some comments
yesterday that suggested that we need households to spend more in order to push
a recovery along, but at the same time, sitting in the monetary policy statement
on page, can't see the page number. It must be about 12, a comment that
households have been saving, possibly in response to limited employment
opportunities and uncertainty about the economic outlook. And then, if we go
through to page 25 we saw a whole lot of households racing to fix their
mortgages in December, following the MP s in November. So what I'm feeling from
that is a whole lot of uncertainty in households and nervousness. Of course,
unemployment, I know more people have entered the employment market, but
unemployment has also gone up. So what I had that just links to, you know, some
pretty strong changes to our employment conditions that have gone through
parliament in the last few days, which creates much more uncertainty for
workers. So I'm linking all of those things together. What on earth are
households going to spend to drive this economy, given the huge uncertainty
that's sitting around?
So there is uncertainty still, particularly around the global economy, and
households have a few years behind them. That's been really hard. It's been high
unemployment, high inflation. It is looking better when we're looking ahead, so
we can see that employment is actually growing. So there's more people also
going into the labour force, and that's often an early stage that in the new
recovery, that we see more people entering the labour force and actually seeing
more employment, but unemployment remains high, and that is of concern to us. So
households, what we're seeing is we're seeing that consumption is starting to
increase, but it's relatively weak growth in consumption compared to historical
patterns. So what we expect is, then, when households see that the labour market
is actually strengthening, and when households see that inflation is falling and
their purchasing power come back, that will give them a bit more certainty. And
the other thing is, is that we do see the savings rates have been a little bit
on the high side, and quite a lot is in just regular savings accounts. So some
households will have ability to increase their consumption, and other people are
still really, really stretched. But we do expect to see how we're higher
household consumption going forward, which will boost the economy. Consumption
is almost 60% of GDP growth. Maybe I don't know, you're also very
like I'd also argue the fact that more people are fixing their mortgage
mortgages is a sign of there's more certainty there about the interest rate
cycle. I think the fact that we've indicated that we at the trough with. The OCR
has incentivized people to go and fix their mortgages
for longer
instead of which is what we saw in that graph that you reference. I also the
labour market is going to need to become more important in household consumption
decisions. One thing that we talk about in the document is, because we don't
have, we don't have a rapid house price appreciation in the forecast, and that
sort of has been a kicker for consumption growth in the New Zealand economy
through a wealth effect for a long time. But something's changed there. So we're
not, yeah,
we're not seeing that so, but we, you know, we do see the labour market
recovering. You know, growth in wages from a monetary policy perspective is
consistent with inflation at 2% which we're very pleased with. But in terms of
take home pay, it is a it is a bit stronger. And, you know, we see, as I said,
we see the labour market improving, and which will give, you know, as well as a
bit more sort of income coming through the door in the term and form of wages.
Just a bit more certainty in a recovering economy will probably diminish that
precautionary incentive to save
and we need to think about not just the most recent interest rate cuts. You've
got to think about the absolute story and the degree of change we've seen since
August, actually nearly 18 months now. But you know, the OCR is down 225 basis
points. Wholesale two year swap, which is important factor in the two year
mortgage rate, which we all know is a flavour of the month, usually four kiwis.
That's down 270 basis points. So that takes time for that transmission to flow
through into the economy.
So
activities go up as that transmission goes through. Is in addition to what we're
already seeing on the export side of the economy as well, which has got real
strength. So we still have some of that two speed economy here occurring here.
So the South Island is much better than the parts of the North Island.
Okay. Dr, ru,
carry on.
So
what I mean as I read this, read this. MP s, I would characterise it as being
faintly nervous and uncertain, and that's how households feel, which is why
they're trying to lock in savings and lock in those low interest rates. And I
know the South Island is recovering well, Christchurch is the place to be at the
moment, but Auckland is not. And so I wonder to what extent you've engaged in
that sort of analysis. We know that a lot of the time Auckland does drive the
economy, but that doesn't, it doesn't feel as though things are happening there,
yet that's reckons and feels but is pulling off. What I do see is given to given
you discussed in the OCR and your committee itself, differing views of the same
facts. I think that's
absolutely physics, yeah,
but it but it's true that we do see, and we do stress that there are differences
across regions, and it is more export led recovery this time compared to more
consumption led but the export LED Side is still very positive. And as Karen
pointed out, it's really important to remember that the OCR cuts 5.5% down to
two point 25 that will still pass through, and there's still a number of
households and firms that will get the stimulus from lower interest rates during
this year,
it's quite you're quite right that Auckland needs to fire for this economy to
grow sustainably, long term. And historically, as I was saying earlier, a lot of
that has been driven by house prices. So in the absence of that, you know what?
What is it? What is going to what? What's the Auckland story?
Very good. Speaking of Auckland. MP for Northcote. Mr.
Chair, Dr Brennan, welcome. Thank you. Paul. Karen, the back there. Hey, just
looking at your media release. You talk about inflation's most likely returning
within band in the current quarter. Now the bank has historically been too late
to act on going up, going down. I'm just keen to get a sense from you on forward
casting to April's meeting, if we're still outside band, what that might mean
for the path right at the pathway for the OCR, for the bank next 12 months.
Yeah. So it is always difficult to do this kind of forecasting, because we have
a lot of these volatile items that can push inflation up or down in the near
term. And. And we are this why we have to do two things. We have to look at,
what are the fundamentals driving inflation in the medium term, and what are the
risks in the near term, if inflation turns out to again be higher than than
expected? Of course, that is a big reason for concern. But even if it is another
quarter when inflation is above the target band. If it's clearly very volatile
items, and we have good reasons to believe that they will fall out of the data,
we might not need to titer sooner. But if it is the case that we see that this
is actually something in price setting behaviour, or the recovery is much
stronger, so we can see that that would mean that the economy will be stronger
going forward, and they can stay sustain higher interest rates, then we would
act and talk about tightening earlier. But one, one outcome on the inflation
number has to be analysed in details to see what are the drivers of the medium
term. I mean, because our goal is the medium,
yeah, and when we look at it at the moment, there's, there's probably three
things that that we're caught we also call out is that core inflation is below
and remains within the band, and the average is around 2.4% so that gives you
some confidence. Wage growth has declined quite dramatically, and we're back at
around that 2% level, and we have significant spare capacity within the economy.
So when we think about the things that monetary policy will have the greatest
effect on, that domestically generated the conditions there are to bring that
back. So it is for us, we can't predict what those shocks might be, and there
are real risks that exist today, globally, in the market. And so it is important
that we actually understand if something were to jump what, as the governor
said, what is actually driving that jump up? And is it something we should look
through, because our goal is around medium term inflation and getting it back
and holding it there sustainably, but the conditions, we have confidence in
those underlying conditions.
Thank you. Canada,
one question
is around the neutral rate, and you talk about the output gap of 1.5 and so in
terms of the neutral OCR, what's the bank's view of where that may land
eventually?
But I can start, and then you can compliment my comments, but that we do have an
estimate a band for between about two point 25 and 4% and that's a very wide
range. We do think that the best estimates are closer to around three, maybe two
and a half to three and a half. And that means that we're now accommodative. And
when it was 5.5 it was clearly tightening. And these numbers are uncertain, you
have to be a bit careful, and that's why we're always so careful in terms of
reading all the incoming data, because just relying too much on saying, Oh, the
neutral rate is exactly 3% then we risk not doing the right thing going forward.
But we do, because we talk, discuss quite a lot the you know, how much spare
capacity we have, we have an estimate for the output gap of minus 1.5% but also
there, there's a bit of uncertainty. And then when you look at the risks that we
say, we're saying that one of the risk is that maybe we have less spare
capacity, or the potential to grow is weaker, and then we could see inflationary
pressures earlier than we expect, and that would mean that we were tightened
earlier. Okay,
we're gonna go to Dr Megan woods. Thanks, Dan,
thank you, and thank you for your report. This report, like the last, I don't
know how many we've received, has a huge section on and over sort of overarching
theme of uncertainty from global factors and not knowing. But I just wonder to
what extent the bank has kind of looking a bit closer, rather than the big, wide
world, in terms of what's happening in Australia, we're seeing inflation high
there. We're seeing it's the first of the banks that we kind of track to
initially raise its rates this year they've started their upward track, and to
what extent you're watching what's happening there, in terms of the Equal and
opposite effect of New Zealand, we've had record numbers of migration to
Australia from New Zealand, highest since 2012 nei what was it net loss of
46,400 New Zealanders to Australia in the last decade. Higher wages, better
jobs, are the things that are luring people across the Tasman. So to what extent
do shifts that happen in Australia? Are you factoring in flow ons for what's
going to happen in New Zealand?
Yeah, it's very important, and we do follow it. Closely we do if we look at the
drivers of inflation in Australia, they've had comparatively higher growth than
New Zealand. Over the past two years, wage growth is considerably higher. The
labour market has been stronger. We do think that this is changing now, so it
will be more in favour of New Zealand, but there's always a risk that when we
compare, we look at the differences to say that, look New Zealand is different,
so we won't see those inflationary pressures here, and we are, we are taking
that into consideration to make sure that we're not missing anything. But the
fundamentals over the past few years have been different than the drivers of
inflation has been different. But maybe Paul, you like to comment, I
would you know, it was interesting over covid, where monetary cycles were so
coordinated across countries because of the global shock, affected everybody in
more or less the same way. And we've sort of come to the end of that, of that
period, and now we are seeing significant cyclical differences across economies,
including across Australia and New Zealand. It's quite unusual that our cash
rate is lower than in Australia, that interest rates in general are lower here
than they are in Australia. But again, it's a reflection of where we are in the
cycle. I would say that structurally, over recent decades, Australia is a
fundamentally stronger economy than New Zealand for a variety of reasons that
essentially come down to higher productivity. But currently in terms of the
cycle, in terms of monetary policy, we have lower inflation and lower interest
rates and supplementary to that, in terms of the kind of equal and opposite
effects that we feel in New Zealand, of that, I guess, migration is one of them,
where we're outflows of New Zealanders to Australia. When we have a look at the
modelling that looking to immigration increasing to about 30,000 people, what
happens in Australia is going to be material on that when we have that large net
out that's right, sitting there. So to what extent have you factored in? There
could be either a slowdown of New Zealanders leaving for Australia, if job
opportunities there lie down, and even New Zealand is starting to come back, so
that we see those migration patterns we've considered that, and we actually
had a good conversation about it around the MP See table. I think the relative
position in our business cycle is quite a fundamental driver of trans Tasman
migration different when the labour markets are in two different places. So it
is entirely feasible that we could see that migration outflow. And I should say
that migration data is is, has been revised down quite consistently over the
year, over the course of the last year. It's a bit ropey, that data, but, but,
yeah,
but that outlooks built on least apart substantially less departures.
That's right.
That's right,
not necessarily substantial increases above
the
numbers that we've seen once on today.
And I guess when you look structurally at that group that has been moving, 40%
of them have been in the 18 to 30 age population. But in terms of some of the
things that we think about in terms of drivers of our own domestic inflation,
like house prices, these kind of shifts are going to make a material impact.
Yes, yeah.
I think affordability in Auckland, for example, in terms of house prices to
income, is now better than it is in the likes of Sydney.
Yeah,
but we could see that move if we start to see an inverse in the in the in the
those migration numbers, and particularly net impacts and outflows of New
Zealanders,
we're
gonna go to Dr David Wilson, oh, okay, thank you. You've talked about more
accommodative monetary policy. That's usually to my ears, and an export led
recovery. There's this kind of notion now that we've got tradable inflation. And
I just want to flip onto the import side, because that's actually interesting, I
think, in terms of what's changed. So my question is really around, what's the
nature of that import inflation? Are we talking more consumables, or is there
some plant machinery about expenditure in there?
That
is a very give
you
a completely different
Yeah. So, so so far, we've seen now, just in the last data for over the couple
of months, now that we see more business investments, and we're also seeing
manufacturing picking up quite considerably, and that should mean that we should
see more machinery and things like that coming in. I haven't seen the import
data in that kind of detail, but it's a very good question. The other thing, if
you look at the import side, is we're actually seeing little bit more when we
look forward, little bit more stability and import prices. We. Is good in terms
of the inflationary side. And we're also seeing inflation in our main, main
trading partners, being stable, actually. So that gives us one of the reasons we
have a little bit more confidence that we'll see inflation in line with target
supplementary TI, you're dealing with the constellation of factors here we've,
you know, highlighted by today, which side you're looking on, tradables, non
tradables, whether it's administrative, all these things are adding up to, it
just a huge constellation. So my question is slightly different in terms of the
fact of, how do we get a handle on this quicker? And are you thinking around
using AI to, you know, give you some multi factorial analysis so we get the
information quicker.
Yes, it's one of the most hardest thing when we're sitting doing policy that the
data is lagging and we would like to have much more real time information. So we
are looking for all the factors that can give us more information about what's
happening in real time. Another part of that is what we're all very committed
to, and it's also part of our transparency, is that we we will go and meet with
businesses, because when we meet with the businesses, they can actually tell us
what they're planning on doing, and then give us more information about where
the economy is heading. We have some forward looking indicators, the Pm is the
psis, and all of these are good, but actually going to meet with businesses all
around the country will also give us an additional sense of where the economy is
heading. So I'm heading to Christchurch. Later today, I'll meet with several
businesses in Christchurch, Auckland next week, and our other fellow MPC members
will also travel the country and meet with businesses and households just to get
that extra information. Yeah,
and the regional is very
Can I just add Sorry, sorry. Chair. New Zealand is a poorly measured economy,
and that is a pain for the Monetary Policy Committee, and we welcome the
government's investment in states. Ng, we look forward to monthly CPI and better
quality macro data in general, and we are supplementing that. There are, you
know, really interesting private data sources available at the moment that are a
bit timely, that they're not a substitute for that sort of national data
infrastructure. But we are exploring all of that and using AI to get on top of
what they're okay,
we've got to start. Just quick start from Dan
Bidwell, yeah, can you just get a sense of how this real time, kiwi, GDP,
Nowcast is doing? I mean, it's very up and down variable. But is the bank
serious and kind of using that as a tool? If so, what are the learnings from
that? What are your observations?
I look at it every Friday afternoon like it's a really good summary of what
happened that week in terms of that higher frequency data. So yeah, it's very
it's very useful. And yes, it does bounce around. We're volatile economy,
yeah,
okay, we're
gonna go to Ricardo manege, Mai, thank you. Just got some quick fire questions.
Is the spending necessary in the next quarter to fix infrastructure damage
through the climate change charge weather events likely to impact on inflation,
and thus your projections on inflation in the official cash rate as the recovery
costs become more clear, and if so, do you have any reflections?
It's a good question. So in terms of we've had really bad weather events, and I
think that we always have to think about the people being affected by this,
first foremost, because it is been really hard, and we've actually seen some
lives lost because of this. We do know that it tends to create volatility in the
data, if you just take the monetary policy perspective. So you looked, food
prices were a bit higher than expected. Now, again, in January, in our
preliminary data, that could have been due to severe weather. We know that that
tends to bounce back after a while. So if you get a spike in food prices from
weather, it tends to come back down again. But then you can also have temporary
effects on GDP, but they tend to be temporary. I don't know if Paul or Karen
like to comment as well, so
I'll just move quickly to chapter five of your report, where you talk about
residential investment. When you talk about residential investment projected to
increase over the medium term, can you spell out to the committee whether you're
talking about investors that are speculating on pre existing properties or
developing new properties, or what kind of mix and ratio are you talking about?
You talked about the Auckland economy previously, mostly had been left for
expensive homes. How much of the growth that you're seeing in residential
investments is just speculation effectively?
Yeah, so I think that we see an uptick in residential investments, which is
likely a good thing, because we don't want under supply of homes. But I think
it's also an effect of the fact that the OCR has been cut by from five to two
point 25 so that is spurring some of these investments. Then exactly how the
composition is? I don't know, Paul, it's construction.
Yeah. But
that is construction. It's not house flipping or anything like that. It's
renovating and building new islands.
Okay, just a quick supplementary in that, Mr. Chair, because previously, with
your former monetary policy statement this term in Parliament, you have
explicitly stated that the government's decisions to shift the bright line test
and restore interest deductibility, not colloquially as the landlord tax cut
would increase housing speculation. You're kind of now saying that the
residential investment side of things will likely be through action. How does
those two statements add up?
Like we like we only incorporate a policy into our forecast, if it's once it's
changed. Like, I think what you're talking about, the bright line test, etc,
etc, is more about having an effect on house prices. Like, I would actually
argue that there may, there may well have been a structural change in the
housing market, and I do think that we have gotten better at building houses.
There's been changes in zoning restrictions, and not just recently, but over the
last decade, particularly in Auckland, around intensification, etc, etc, and
that is having an impact on, you know when, when we lower interest rates and
demand for housing increases? It used to be the case because the supply side was
so sticky that that would just translate into higher house prices, and we'd get
a sort of wealth kicker through through that channel. Now, if that supply side
is more free to sort of respond, an increase in demand for houses is more likely
to end up generating more construction activity. We see it through activity,
instead of through houses and through prices. And this is a very welcome
development. I think it's sort of a little bit early to sort of call, yeah,
there's a structural change there. It could turn around with population growth
starts to increase, etc, etc. But it may well be the case that we've had a
structural change in how the housing market operates in New Zealand.
And finally, Mr. Chair, just my last up. Can you be clear whether you would have
done anything differently with this monetary policy statement and Official Cash
Rate position if you still religious leader to consider maximum sustainable
employment,
that's a little bit hypothetical. You know, we still really take the labour
market into consideration, because it affects inflation. You know, if it was a
bit more front and centre, I don't know. I don't know. Like, I do think that
regular changes in our mandate do have an effect on how we set monetary policy,
and I think we should. I don't think that we our mandate should be changed too
easily or too frequently, because I think it is at the margin a little bit
destabilising.
Yeah. Look, the policy is definitely accommodative, right? And what we see is
Labour conditions will improve over over the next 1224, months. And I think that
you would argue supports maximum sustainable employment, because it's heading in
the right direction. So you've got, you can't just look at, is the OCR, the only
thing that makes those changes. That is why it was never a target. Was only ever
you could support that. And I think that the policy stance we have in existence
today supports improvements in employment from here.
I think that's a good point.
Okay, we'll leave it at that. We're going to We're entering the rapid fire
section now. So that's rapid questions, and if we can as succinct answers as
possible to get us through as much as we can in the next 10 minutes. Nancy, Lu,
thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome back. Geffner. Global Growth, I think it's,
it's held up better than a lot of people have expected in our country, but also
around the world and but obviously a lot of uncertainty. So what is the specific
global channels that you the committee and as governor will be more focused on
for the next six to 12 months, whether it'll be trade or financial conditions,
oil or shipping, China or Asian demand? What would that be
also, actually, we have to look at all of those factors. That's really our job.
So but of course, our main trading partners are the most important if you look
at the global economy. So we do look to growth in our main trading partners,
because it's so important for our exporting firms. We look at the inflationary
pressures as well in our main trading partners, because that will affect import
prices and export prices, which are important for the economy. We do take
financial conditions into consideration. So we have discussed not just the
tightening of financial conditions, but also that the whole yield curve we've
seen steepening and bond term premium going up over the. Past few months, after
what's happened in Japan, for example. So we do take these things into
consideration, and then we do we look at consensus forecast to do our assessment
of our global growth is hedging and how it's affecting us. But again, we're
focusing on our main trading partners. And then, as always, you know, in terms
of the risk assessments, we have to look at the global economy as well. So we do
that.
Okay? We'll go to Todd Stevenson.
Thank you. Thank you, Governor. Good to hear you're getting out and about around
the country. The Kiwi summer might not have been quite what
you've been Sweden.
Oh,
anyway, in your opening comments, you talked about the recovery is broadening
across the economy. What does that mean?
Well, it's a good question. It's really important to us. So we've really seen
over the past few years that the agricultural sector has been performing well.
Commodity prices has been high, and that has been supporting the New Zealand
economy. And now we're seeing that manufacturing is also starting to increase a
bit more. It's partly related to agriculture, but not only, I think we're
forgetting sometimes that we actually have a tech sector that's also doing
really well in New Zealand, and they are very global from the beginning, and
they are also there's high paid, high productive jobs. But what we're wanting to
see is also the domestic side improving in a wider sense. And thus has been the
if you look at small businesses that mainly are affected by domestic conditions,
they've had a hard time for many years. Tourism is also coming back, actually,
if we look at the numbers. So the what we mean by the broadening is seeing more
sectors performing well and lifting the whole economy. And we're seeing this
beginning of that, but we want to see more of
it. And so is it your hope? Then that? Yeah, and again, we talked a lot about
kind of what households are feeling. But is it your hope? Then we'll see maybe
the hospitality sector, cafes, restaurants start to again, experience maybe some
more growth,
yes, and when households feel that the labour market is strengthening and also
inflation coming back, so they feel that the purchasing power is coming back,
then that tends to boost the domestic economy. And that's also why we keep on
stressing that it's so important to get inflation back to a lower, stable level,
this 2% midpoint that we keep on talking about, because then we see wages being
higher than inflation, and that is really what we give houses, the purchase and
power in addition to and I
suppose, from your perspective in Kiwis have got certainty about where things
are hitting
Yeah, thank
you. Okay.
Thank
you, Todd. We're going to go back to the honourable Barbara Edmonds.
Thank you, Paul. You and I have had this conversation before around why New
Zealand has low productivity, you know, and the Productivity Commission and
yourself earlier speech, I said last year before very clear those five key areas
right where we are geographically shallow pools of capital, uplift and
innovation and Tech Research and Development and access to capital. You've just
done a review of the capital requirement rules for the banks. We've had the
banks come in for part two of the banking inquiry in the last week. Again, when
we talk to the banks, particularly one bank, they were saying, because of that,
they were able to provide more lending, about $20 billion to housing and $7
billion to business. What is it that we need to do around that access to
capital? Because it's clear that that's where the market is going. Still heavily
on the property side, we don't have a very diverse economy like Australia that
can take shocks better. What else is there available for policymakers to help
actually encourage the banks? Yes, investing in business is a bit riskier, but
we need that part of the sector to help us lift productivity. What are the sort
of questions we should be asking and what are the sort of policies we should be
looking
Do you want to start? Or do you want
I can
just start by saying that, you know, if you look at the capital review, one of
the things that we did there, it was giving the banks better ability to lend to
the productive side of the economy as well, but it was also proportionate, so it
makes it easier for the smaller banks to compete with the larger ones. And that
is also one of the things that we're doing to enhance competition in the banking
sector, and that is important. There is another number of steps that we're
working with as well, in terms of looking at who can actually use the word bank,
that kind of thing. But it's also, it seems like a small thing, but it might be
important just for these smaller ones to compete. Also access to our payment
system has been broadened, which is also opening up. New entrance. Then, with
that said, we always have to be careful, and we can't grant a bank licence if
people are not fulfilling basic requirements. So we will ensure that we have the
financial stability side, the prudential supervision in there as well. But
competition is a key focus for us in terms of the work we're doing on that side.
Yeah, then there's other things are related to productivity as well. So
like, just high level, the potential is there for New Zealand to lift its
productivity in a fundamental way, like the gap between productivity in New
Zealand the way we use technology, essentially, compared to other leading OECD
economies, is large. And if we did get our policy settings right, the potential
for new technologies to diffuse into this economy and throughout this economy is
high. It's sort of all there for the taking. And, you know, AI is kind of the
latest thing, you know, what are we doing to sort of grab hold of the benefits
of that? I think that is a policy question, and also private sector behaviour as
well and banking,
the thing that I think you made the point that banks look at is how much risk do
they want to take into their portfolio, and definitely, small business in
particular is more risky than obviously lending to on a household where you have
an underlying asset sitting in there. So cash flow lending into small business
is definitely more risky, and so you would definitely see them not apply as much
going into there. What the shallow pool of capital and the level, the quantum of
capital that is available for those businesses to expand is one of the critical
issues that needs to be addressed here in this economy, because banks will only
continue to pour more into here on the basis that they see more stability in
that cash flow generation. When it's a small business, it's much more volatile.
So that's an equity risk that you're talking about, rather than necessarily a
debt risk. Yeah.
Okay, final question from me, and this is paint a picture question, Governor,
what can Kiwi consumers, homeowners, employees, small businesses, investors,
what can they likely expect economically? Looking at through to 2026
they can expect an economy that is recovering. They can expect stronger
employment growth. They can expect stronger growth overall, in more sectors.
It's it's going in the right direction for New Zealand,
and they can expect low and stable complexion.
Thank you. Fantastic.
Through you, Mr. Chair, a couple of times it was fascinating. You talked about
the move in some of the different data sets they're starting to use to
supplement the official stats data, and also the use of AI, which I think is a
really interesting and important development. I think it would be useful perhaps
at the next MP even to have an extra 10 minutes a special session just for us to
be briefed on the shifts there and what that looks like. Thank you.
That's fine, and we will expect to see you after the next MP on Eighth of April,
so see you on the night.
Thank
you so much.
Thank you really appreciate
it. That concludes.
It off to your next select
committee. Thank you.